---
layout: post
title: "learning"
date: 2010-06-11 00:00:00 -700
categories: Blog
---

<div class="blog-content">
				<div class="paragraph" style='text-align:left;'>So my UI design was lousy. really really lousy.<br><br>but that is A-OK.<br><br>See, the real purpose of doing this game... and writing this blog, is just to learn.<br><br>I set about the task of creating a throw away game... something that I would build to learn the tools, learn some coding, just simply get something built. Now if it turns out the game is any fun, then I would dive right in and finish the thing, but this will not likely be the case. This game will probably always suck. that is A-OK too.<br><br>I am rebuilding the game graphics, and therefore the entire UI to make everything a bit more clear... not a ton, but a bit.<br><br>This is the fourth full go round on the graphics, not including minor tweaks and additions. This is also the third time I have programmed it. The game started out on the xna framework and then I quickly moved to the unity engine.... much better. I started coding it in javascript and then moved over to C#.... also much better. Every time I learn more and more about the nuts and bolts. Occasionally I learn something about actual game design, but that seems to be a long term education kind of thing.<br><br>In redoing the graphics I'm trying to learn how to create a more clear and usable UI, while resisting the artist tendency to try to build "finished" assets.<br><br>Of course all this learning is difficult when you are, occasionally, as profoundly stupid as I can be.<br><br>but that is A-OK.<br></div>

		</div>
        