---
layout: post
title: "old and new"
date: 2011-04-21 00:00:00 -700
categories: Blog
---

<div class="blog-content">
				<div class="paragraph" style='text-align:left;'>reboot<br><br>Okay, I&rsquo;ve been working on the same project for ages. In multiple languages, and a couple different frameworks. My plan from the outset was to create something small so that I could learn the tools and languages I would need to create my own games. Not clickity click around in some game builder either. I wanted to have a really firm grasp of what I was building. I wanted to write the code, and work with the tools on a fairly low level. That said, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary, I&rsquo;m not a complete idiot. I realize that the constraints of time and familiarity with the tools wouldn&rsquo;t allow me to create my own game engine, or anything like that. I started by Using first XNA, dabbling with OGRE, and then settling on Unity. All three allowed me to work quickly enough to see progress, but still required that I learn JavaScript or C# and, more importantly, some work flow, structure, and design strategies.<br><br>If, in the future, I&rsquo;m ever provided with an opportunity to work with a programmer more skilled than myself, a parrot or eggplant for example, I&rsquo;ll at least understand what they are talking about.<br><br>I just recently created an app for the Blackberry Playbook. It is currently going through approval. It is a very small, very simple toy for very young children. Random shapes bounce around the screen and you poke at them to make them burst and fade away. You also hear a satisfying sound. That&rsquo;s it. It&rsquo;s called ShapeToy. The point is, simple or not, ShapeToy is a completed app. It&rsquo;s a finished thing. That <a href="../stuff/shapeToy/index.html" style="">you can play with</a>. I&rsquo;m pretty sure that I couldn&rsquo;t have done that a year ago. <br><br>The main problem with &ldquo;Color Game&rdquo; is that I never really designed it as a game. I created a school, and sent myself too it. Like school, learning was the point, and anything that you created has very little value as a stand alone work. There may be something that I can dig out of that and polish up into a game. ShapeToy was designed for a specific purpose. Until I reconsider the color game concept as a game first, it will never really be successful. <br><br>So I have decided to shelve Color Game for a bit until I can really rethink it. <br><br>I have started up 3 new projects. Each one designed to be a game first. I&rsquo;ll likely learn something along the way, but these projects are all focused on the finished product, not the process. I&rsquo;ve started on the one that seems to be the most unabashedly &ldquo;video game&rdquo;. If, or rather, when I get hung up on some issue, I will bounce around to the other two projects, hopefully learning something new and clearing any mental blocks. I fully intend for at least one, if not all of these projects to be finished things. That people can play, or even buy. Probably on a phone. <br><br>I&rsquo;ve already started working on the next iteration of ShapeToy, that includes letters, numbers, and different sounds. I&rsquo;m just waiting on a tool update from RIM that makes some of the local file storage/access features of HTML5 useable from an app. Since I think there is still an enjoyable core to the thing, I&rsquo;ll probably dive back into Color Game as well, but for now, I think I&rsquo;ll focus on making some games. &nbsp;<br></div>

		</div>
        